---
layout: post
title: Personal programming experiences and impressions on R
---
## My previous experience before using R  
I had zero experience with programming languages and workflows until about 2017. I feel my learning path mirrors a lot of bench biologist in the time of high throughput biotchnologies.  
**PBS** and **Bash** were all what I used initially as most of my workflows use very conventional processing and analysis pipelines. Writing `.sh` scripts with PBS commands and copy/paste for ***each*** sample before submitting to department's HPC was my standard practice. I also just copied and used people's R scripts/functions without really knowing any specifics, because it was fortunately that standardized. I then started dealing with custom workflows that standard tools available weren't enough, which led me to learn python in a very short period of time. I consider that time to be my official introduction to computer programming.  
I wrote rudimentary **Python** scripts that proceesesed my data (all of which are strictly formatted without me needing to do additional parsing, which was good). Following that, I started digging into a little more details in **R** as well.  
## Learning R wasn't as easy as many people described (at least for me)  
Sure knowing some Python helps, but differences in syntax and many conventions still took me a while to get used to without systematic understanding of things like basics of algorithms, data structures etc. This was the point when I decided to learn more about computer science. So I took a CS intro course at my school, and auditted some other courses online. And now I am in the Data Science Foundations certificate program.  
## The OOP centric aspect of R together with what **R** is desinged for are what I like the most about it  
During my learning and application of **Python**, things were pretty straight forward. There weren't super complicated scoping where oop was really needed. Having learnt more about data structures, I really appreciate the inticacy of such programming approach while appropriate, which is exactly the case for R. As a statistical focused language, the functions are simple to use, and operations on objects are not cyptic.  
## R is definitely not the fastest  
From my understanding, the oop design is sort of a double edged sword. While its impact is minimized due to how people use **R**, but sometimes the efficiency is somewhat to be desired for such language where pretty much everything is oop. To my understanding, **R** can technically also be fast, but not without some fundamental design changes. For me, **it doesn't mean I like it less** vs. **Python**, because we can absolutely use different languages to their advantages to achieve our goals. My work flow for example, uses **Python** to process sequencing data that can be in sizes of tens or even hundreds of gibibytes. Many other programs I call such as sequence aligners mostly also use languages like perl or **Python**, which are very efficient. The end results of these processing are data with much smaller size and increased dimensions, which are perfect for **R**.  
## I would like R to have.. maybe better scalability?
Due to my approach mentioned above, plus me being a novice, I have not come across times when I feel I wish **R** has something that **Python** has. One thing I could imagine that I might wish to have in the future is simplicity to implement parallele processing, which is fairly easy with **Python**. I understand shinyR does that, but it is at the level that is outside of my league now. 
